README.md, before:

# ** SUD Databook Code **

There are two parts to this repo: the SAS EBI code to run all the programs to pull from TAF and produce all the output for the databook, and the local python code to create the formal Excel tables.

## 1. SAS EBI code

.. will add

## 2. Local python code 

The code to run locally in python to create the formal tables for the databook is located in the python_local subfolder [here](./python_local). The tables are populated by reading in the datasets created on EBI, rearranging them and creating stats (e.g. %s, rates), and then writing by cell to the empty table templates. This section details (A) how to run the code, (B) how the code is structured, and (C) what to update before running.

### A. How to run

This project uses pipenv to manage package depencies, and to add the main  **sud_databook_tables** as a package to then easily call the individual modules using entry points.

To create the virtual environment using the [Pipfile](./python_local/Pipfile), navigate to this folder in Git bash or terminal of your choice, and submit the following:

```bash
pipenv update
```

To enter the virtual env so that all commands given at the terminal are run in the virtual env, submit the following command:

```bash
pipenv shell
```

Note that each of the modules are added as entry points in [setup.py](./python_local/setup.py) so they can be run in the virtual env with command shortcuts. The main module to create the tables is [write_db_tables](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db). (NB. There are two additional modules defined but this README won't cover those as they were just run ad-hoc.)

To run the main module, you can use the entry point defined in [setup.py](./python_local/setup.py) that is set to run the `main()` function within the module's [cli.py](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/cli.py) script. This call takes one required `(--year)` and one optional `(--pyr_comp)` parameter.

`--year` must be set to the year of the databook you are running.
`--pyr_comp` is a boolean that indicates whether comparisons to the prior year's databook should be run. The default is True.

Submit the following commands:

```bash
pipenv update
pipenv shell
write_db_tables --year 2020
```

Note that the pipenv commands are only required if you need to update and then enter the virtual env shell.

### B. Code structure

As noted above, the module to create tables is called via the `main()` function within the module's [cli.py](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/cli.py) script.

Note there is one main set of tables (the SUD tables), and a companion set of tables (the OUD tables) that are always created. The OUD tables contain some of the main tables subset to a specific population of those identified as having OUD. The G tables contain comparisons to the prior year and are only created if `--pyr_comp` was set to True.

- The first thing it does is read in the [config.yaml](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/config/config.yaml) file to get the needed information on how to run each table. This is the most important file in the module! This file is structured with two outer dictionaries:
    1. **TABLE_MAPPINGS** is the dictionary for the main set of tables. There is one key per table (sheet). Within each key is all the information needed to run that table, including e.g. which sheet it maps to (`sheet_num_sud`), which SAS variables to read in as numerators (`numerators`), etc.
    2. **G_TABLE_MAPPINGS** is the dictionary to populate the supplemental G tables, which create comparisons to the prior year. There is one key per main table. Within each key are key-value pairs where the key is the G table to be populated with that main table's information, and the value is a list of columns from that main table to pull in.

- The next thing it does is open the table shells (see below for instructions on how to update paths to those if needed). It then calls the main function [gen_tables](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/gen_tables.py) to do all processing and write to each sheet.

- The final step is saving the populated templates with the year and date information in the file names.

### C. What to update

If there are no structural changes to the tables that require updates to the main code, the only things that may require updates are folder/file paths. They are all defined in [params.py](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/common/utils/params.py).

Each file/folder path should be fairly self-explanatory:
- Base Restricted and Main N-drive folders
- Subdirectories for the templates, input SAS datasets, output tables and logs
- Template and populated file names

The final params are lists of states to set to `DQ` if they are flagged for data quality issues (current year and prior year separately). The researchers will tell you which states should be flagged. Set to empty lists if none are flagged.

If there ARE structural changes to any of the tables, it is likely the [config.yaml](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/config/config.yaml) will need to be updated to reflect changes to the specific table(s), as long as the change is functionality that's already incorporated into the module. If the functionality is brand new, further code will likely need to be added to specific functions/methods to reflect this.

Commit message:

docs: update README  for SAS EBI

README.md, after:

# ** SUD Databook Code **

There are two parts to this repo: the SAS EBI code to run all the programs to pull from TAF and produce all the output for the databook, and the local python code to create the formal Excel tables.

## 1. SAS EBI code

The code to run the databook on SAS EBI is copied to this repo [here](./sas_ebi). It exists on SAS EBI at `/sasdata/users/&sysuserid/tmsisshare/prod/Task_4_and_5_TAF_analyses/`. There is one subfolder per year. Note that it does not have to remain like this, since we can keep records of different versions of the code in Git now, but the setup was made prior to the use of Git, so we wanted to keep years fully separate. You can choose to change this!

This section details (A) how to run the code, (B) how the code is structured,  (C) what to update before running, and (D) additional DQ code to run.

### A. How to run

To submit the full set of programs to run the databook, batch submit [00_sud_batch.sas](./sas_ebi/00_sud_batch.sas). Set the macro parameter `%year` to the specific years to run. The programs run very quickly in Redshift and shouldn't take more than 1-2 hours.

All datasets to be downloaded to then create the tables with the local python code will be saved in the libname `sasout` (assigned in the batch program).

### B. Code structure

As noted above, all programs are run via batch submitting the batch program listed above. The first three programs (01-03) in the series identify the SUD population via three different methods, program 04 creates our final analytic population, and programs 05-09 generate various stats for the population related to their claims usage.

### C. What to update

There are code sets that the researcher/analyst will update each year. These code sets must be uploaded to the folder assigned to `%indata`. As long as they are in the same format as the prior year's code sets, no changes will be needed to the code to process them (aside from the file name if needed).

### D. Additional DQ code to run

There is a completely separate set of code [here](./sas_ebi/DQ_Atlas_Replication) that runs specific DQ Atlas metrics to determine which states have data quality issues and should be excluded from this year's databook. Preeti Gill wrote these and ran them for 2020, so reach out to her (or ask the team) to run for future years.

## 2. Local python code

The code to run locally in python to create the formal tables for the databook is located in the python_local subfolder [here](./python_local). The tables are populated by reading in the datasets created on EBI, rearranging them and creating stats (e.g. %s, rates), and then writing by cell to the empty table templates. This section details (A) how to run the code, (B) how the code is structured, and (C) what to update before running.

### A. How to run

This project uses pipenv to manage package depencies, and to add the main  **sud_databook_tables** as a package to then easily call the individual modules using entry points.

To create the virtual environment using the [Pipfile](./python_local/Pipfile), navigate to this folder in Git bash or terminal of your choice, and submit the following:

```bash
pipenv update
```

To enter the virtual env so that all commands given at the terminal are run in the virtual env, submit the following command:

```bash
pipenv shell
```

Note that each of the modules are added as entry points in [setup.py](./python_local/setup.py) so they can be run in the virtual env with command shortcuts. The main module to create the tables is [write_db_tables](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db). (NB. There are two additional modules defined but this README won't cover those as they were just run ad-hoc.)

To run the main module, you can use the entry point defined in [setup.py](./python_local/setup.py) that is set to run the `main()` function within the module's [cli.py](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/cli.py) script. This call takes one required `(--year)` and one optional `(--pyr_comp)` parameter.

`--year` must be set to the year of the databook you are running.
`--pyr_comp` is a boolean that indicates whether comparisons to the prior year's databook should be run. The default is True.

Submit the following commands:

```bash
pipenv update
pipenv shell
write_db_tables --year 2020
```

Note that the pipenv commands are only required if you need to update and then enter the virtual env shell.

### B. Code structure

As noted above, the module to create tables is called via the `main()` function within the module's [cli.py](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/cli.py) script.

Note there is one main set of tables (the SUD tables), and a companion set of tables (the OUD tables) that are always created. The OUD tables contain some of the main tables subset to a specific population of those identified as having OUD. The G tables contain comparisons to the prior year and are only created if `--pyr_comp` was set to True.

- The first thing it does is read in the [config.yaml](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/config/config.yaml) file to get the needed information on how to run each table. This is the most important file in the module! This file is structured with two outer dictionaries:
    1. **TABLE_MAPPINGS** is the dictionary for the main set of tables. There is one key per table (sheet). Within each key is all the information needed to run that table, including e.g. which sheet it maps to (`sheet_num_sud`), which SAS variables to read in as numerators (`numerators`), etc.
    2. **G_TABLE_MAPPINGS** is the dictionary to populate the supplemental G tables, which create comparisons to the prior year. There is one key per main table. Within each key are key-value pairs where the key is the G table to be populated with that main table's information, and the value is a list of columns from that main table to pull in.

- The next thing it does is open the table shells (see below for instructions on how to update paths to those if needed). It then calls the main function [gen_tables](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/gen_tables.py) to do all processing and write to each sheet.

- The final step is saving the populated templates with the year and date information in the file names.

### C. What to update

If there are no structural changes to the tables that require updates to the main code, the only things that may require updates are folder/file paths. They are all defined in [params.py](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/common/utils/params.py).

Each file/folder path should be fairly self-explanatory:
- Base Restricted and Main N-drive folders
- Subdirectories for the templates, input SAS datasets, output tables and logs
- Template and populated file names

The final params are lists of states to set to `DQ` if they are flagged for data quality issues (current year and prior year separately). The researchers will tell you which states should be flagged. Set to empty lists if none are flagged.

If there ARE structural changes to any of the tables, it is likely the [config.yaml](./python_local/sud_databook_tables/write_db/config/config.yaml) will need to be updated to reflect changes to the specific table(s), as long as the change is functionality that's already incorporated into the module. If the functionality is brand new, further code will likely need to be added to specific functions/methods to reflect this.
